Added documentation covering ROS2 gem. (#2191)
o3de/o3de.org: content/docs/user-guide/gems/reference/ros2/ros2-gem-user-guide.md

---
linkTitle: Guide
title: O3DE ROS 2 Gem Details
description: User guide to develop ROS 2 enabled simulation
toc: true
---

> The O3DE ROS 2 Gem and its build instructions can be found in [this repository](https://github.com/o3de/o3de-extras/tree/development/Gems/ROS2). The ROS 2 Gem helps to build robotic simulations with [ROS 2 / Robot Operating System](https://www.ros.org/).An example of usage can be seen at [Robot Vacuum Sample](https://github.com/o3de/RobotVacuumSample).

Reviewer: At the start of a page, it's important to have a few sentences introducing the purpose of the page. In addition to the background information you provide, I highly suggest defining "what information can the user find in this page".

Author: Added a few sentences here with explanations.

Note that the simulation node is handled through `ROS2SystemComponent` - a singleton. However, you are free to create and use your own nodes if you need more than one.

Typically, you will be creating publishers and subscriptions. This is done through [rclcpp API](https://docs.ros2.org/humble/api/rclcpp/classrclcpp_1_1Node.html). Example:

```
auto ros2Node = ROS2Interface::Get()->GetNode();
AZStd::string fullTopic = ROS2Names::GetNamespacedName(GetNamespace(), m_MyTopic);
m_myPublisher = ros2Node->create_publisher<sensor_msgs::msg::PointCloud2>(fullTopic.data(), QoS());
```

Note that QoS class is a simple wrapper to [`rclcpp::QoS`](https://docs.ros.org/en/humble/p/rclcpp/generated/classrclcpp_1_1QoS.html).

### Frames

`ROS2FrameComponent` is a representation of an interesting physical part of the robot. It handles spatio-temporal relationship between this part and other frames of reference. It also encapsulates namespaces, which help to distinguish between different robots and different parts of the robot, such in the case of multiple identical sensors on one robot.

All Sensors and the Robot Control Component require `ROS2FrameComponent`.

### Sensors

> Sensors are Components deriving from `ROS2SensorComponent`. They acquire data from the simulated environment and publish it to ROS 2 domain.

Reviewer: Nit: You can lowercase "component", it shouldn't be capitalized here. However, you can keep it capitalized when referring to a component's class name and using in-style code. On the other hand, "Gem" is always capitalized. (There are more instances of this throughout the page.)

```suggestion
Sensors are components deriving from `ROS2SensorComponent`. They acquire data from the simulated environment and publish it to ROS 2 domain.
```

Author: Adjusted in whole PR.

- [Twist](https://github.com/ros2/common_interfaces/blob/master/geometry_msgs/msg/Twist.msg) messages.
- [AckermannDrive](https://index.ros.org/p/ackermann_msgs/#humble)
  The component subscribes to these command messages on a configured topic. The topic is "cmd_vel" by default, in a namespace as dictated by ROS2Frame.

To make use of received command messages, use either `AckermannControlComponent`, `RigidBodyTwistControlComponent` or `SkidSteeringControlComponent` , depending on steering type. You can also implement your own control component or use LUA scripting to handle these commands. Unless scripting is used, control components should translate ROS 2 commands to events on `VehicleInputControlBus`. These events will be handled by a [`VehicleModelComponent`](#vehicle-model) if it is present. You can use tools such as [rqt_robot_steering](https://index.ros.org/p/rqt_robot_steering/) to move your robot with Twist messages. `RobotControl` is suitable to use with [ROS 2 navigation stack](https://navigation.ros.org/). It is possible to implement your own control mechanisms with this Component.

### Vehicle Model

> `VehicleModelComponent` serves the purpose of converting inputs such as target velocity, steering or acceleration to physical forces on parts of a vehicle (robot). `VehicleModel` has a `VehicleConfiguration` which is used to define axles, parametrize and assign wheels. The model requires a `WheelControllerComponent` present in each wheel entity. It also uses an implementation of `DriveModel`, which converts vehicle inputs to forces acting on steering elements and wheels.

Reviewer: This comment regards all components: 

Component documentation lives in the `/docs/user-guide/component/reference/` section. I suggest creating a task to move the component sections there. For writing component pages, please refer to the [Component Reference template](https://www.o3de.org/docs/contributing/to-docs/templates/component-reference-doc/. There's some additional information that you should considering providing about components. For example, the component's properties table should also have a `Value` and `Default` column.
For Ackermann Drive Model, refer to the formatting of "Complex set of properties" section of the Component Reference template. This splits up component properties that are organized in component groups into separate tables. This way you don't need to write long names for the components.

Reviewer: I know this is a much larger request, so I'm happy to work with your team to figure out how and when we can make these adjustments to the ROS 2 Gem docs!

Reviewer: Yes, that's a great idea

Reviewer 2: Awesome thanks @chanmosq 👍

It is possible to implement your own control mechanisms with this Component.

### Spawner

`ROS2SpawnerComponent` handles spawning entities during simulation. Available spawnables have to be set up as the component's field before the simulation. User is able to define named spawn points inside the Editor. This can be done by adding `ROS2SpawnPointComponent` to a child entity of an entity with `ROS2SpawnerComponent`. During the simulation user can access names of available spawnables and request spawning using ros2 services. The names of services are `/get_available_spawnable_names` and `/spawn_entity` respectivly. GetWorldProperties.srv and SpawnEntity.srv types are used to handle these features. In order to request defined spawn points names user can use `/get_spawn_points_names` service with GetWorldProperties.srv type. Detailed information about specific spawn point (e.g. pose) can be accessed using `/get_spawn_point_info` service with GetModelState.srv type. All used services types are defined in gazebo_msgs package.

> - Spawning: spawnable name should be passed in request.name and the position of entity in request.initial_pose
>   - example call: `ros2 service call /spawn_entity gazebo_msgs/srv/SpawnEntity '{name: 'robot', initial_pose: {position:{ x: 4, y: 4, z: 0.2}, orientation: {x: 0.0, y: 0.0, z: 0.0, w: 1.0}}}'`

Reviewer: Formatting suggestions: 
	- Bold each type's name
	- Change the example call to use a code block rather than in-line code style
	- Use in-line code style for file names (as well as paths and directories) and code or configuration elements
	- Write in complete sentences and end them with a period

This suggestion is for all items in the list, however I demonstrate it in the first element as such: 
````suggestion
- **Spawning**: The spawnable name must be passed in `request.name` and the position of entity in `request.initial_pose`.
  - Example call: 
  ```
  ros2 service call /spawn_entity gazebo_msgs/srv/SpawnEntity '{name: 'robot', initial_pose: {position:{ x: 4, y: 4, z: 0.2}, orientation: {x: 0.0, y: 0.0, z: 0.0, w: 1.0}}}
  ```
````

- Spawning in defined spawn point: spawnable name should be passed in request.name and the name of the spawn point in request.xml
  - example call: `ros2 service call /spawn_entity gazebo_msgs/srv/SpawnEntity '{name: 'robot', xml: 'spawn_spot'}'`
- Available spawnable names access: names of available spawnables are sent in response.model_names
  - example call: `ros2 service call /get_available_spawnable_names gazebo_msgs/srv/GetWorldProperties`
- Defined spawn points' names access: names of defined points are sent in response.model_names
  - example call: `ros2 service call /get_spawn_points_names gazebo_msgs/srv/GetWorldProperties`
- Detailed spawn point info access: spawn point name should be passed in request.model_name. Defined pose is sent in response.pose.
  - example call: `ros2 service call /get_spawn_point_info gazebo_msgs/srv/GetModelState '{model_name: 'spawn_spot'}'`

## Handling custom ROS 2 dependencies

> The ROS 2 Gem will respect your choice of [__sourced__](https://docs.ros.org/en/humble/Tutorials/Workspace/Creating-A-Workspace.html#source-the-overlay) ROS 2 environment. The Gem comes with a number of ROS 2 packages already included and linked, but you might want to include additional packages in your project. To do so, use the `target_depends_on_ros2` function:
> 
> ```
> target_depends_on_ros2_packages(<your_target> <ros_package1> <ros_package2>)
> ```
> 
> in your project's `Gem/CMakeLists.txt`.

Reviewer: Formatting suggestion: Because it breaks the flow of the paragraph, you can instead put the code block at the end of the sentence. 
````suggestion
The ROS 2 Gem will respect your choice of [__sourced__](https://docs.ros.org/en/humble/Tutorials/Workspace/Creating-A-Workspace.html#source-the-overlay) ROS 2 environment. The Gem comes with a number of ROS 2 packages already included and linked, but you might want to include additional packages in your project. To do so, use the `target_depends_on_ros2` function in your project's `Gem/CMakeLists.txt`:

```
target_depends_on_ros2_packages(<your_target> <ros_package1> <ros_package2>)
```
````

---
linkTitle: Guide
title: ROS2 Gem Details
description: User guide to develop ROS2 enabled simulation
toc: true
---

The Gem and its build instructions can be found in [this repository](https://github.com/o3de/o3de-extras/tree/development/Gems/ROS2). The
ROS 2 Gem helps to build robotic simulations with [ROS 2 / Robot Operating System](https://www.ros.org/). For an example
of use see [Warehouse Demo Project](https://github.com/RobotecAI/Ros2WarehouseDemo) or [Robot Vacuum Sample](https://github.com/o3de/RobotVacuumSample).

# Components overview

- __Central Singleton__
  - ROS2SystemComponent
- __Core abstractions__
  - ROS2FrameComponent
  - ROS2SensorComponent
- __Sensors__
  - ROS2CameraSensorComponent
  - ROS2GNSSSensorComponent
  - ROS2IMUSensorComponent
  - ROS2LidarSensorComponent
  - ROS2OdometrySensorComponent
- __Robot control__
  - ROS2RobotControlComponent

>   - AckermannControlComponent

Reviewer 3: Add Skid Steering component, in general update this once skid steering is merged (including Vehicle dynamics)

  - RigidBodyTwistControlComponent
- __Spawner__
  - ROS2SpawnerComponent
  - ROS2SpawnPointComponent
- __Vehicle dynamics__
  - VehicleModelComponent
  - WheelControllerComponent
- __Robot Import (URDF) system component__
  - ROS2RobotImporterSystemComponent
  
# The Gem and ROS 2 ecosystem

## Supported Platforms and versions

> The Gem is currently Linux-only and is being tested with ROS 2 Humble on Ubuntu 22.04 as well as ROS 2 Galactic with

Reviewer 3: Again, add explicitly that it is not supported on Windows.

Ubuntu 20.04.

It is intended to support any modern ROS 2 version, following these priorities:

- The most recent LTS version (e.g. in June 2022, [ROS 2 Humble](https://docs.ros.org/en/humble/Installation.html)).
- The most recent non-LTS version ([ROS 2 Galactic](https://docs.ros.org/en/galactic/Installation.html)).
- The always-fresh [ROS 2 Rolling](https://docs.ros.org/en/rolling/Installation.html).
- Older versions.

Currently tested and validated versions / platforms will be detailed in

> the [project repository](https://github.com/RobotecAI/o3de-ros2-gem).

Reviewer 3: update the link and find other such links to update

If you have multiple versions installed, make sure
you [source](https://docs.ros.org/en/galactic/Tutorials/Workspace/Creating-A-Workspace.html#source-the-overlay) the one
you want to use. You can check which version is sourced in your console by checking the value of `ROS_DISTRO`
environment variable (`echo $ROS_DISTRO`).

## ROS 2 Concepts

Please refer to [ROS 2 Concepts documentation](https://docs.ros.org/en/humble/Concepts.html) if you are not familiar

> with how ROS 2 works.

Author: Removed.

relationship between this part and other frames of reference. It also encapsulates namespaces, which help to distinguish
between different robots and different parts of the robot, such as in case of multiple identical sensors on one robot.

All Sensors and the Robot Control Component require `ROS2FrameComponent`.

### Sensors

Sensors are Components deriving from `ROS2SensorComponent`. They acquire data from the simulated environment and publish
it to ROS 2 domain.

- Each sensor has a configuration, including one or more Publishers.
- Sensors publish at a given rate (frequency).
- Some sensors can be visualised.

If you intend to add your own sensor, it might be useful to look at how sensors already provided within the Gem are
implemented.

Sensors can be fall into one of two categories:
- sensors which replicate real devices to some degree of realism.
- ground truth "sensors", which can be useful for development and machine learning.

### Robot Control

The Gem comes with `ROS2RobotControlComponent`, which you can use to move your robot through:

- [Twist](https://github.com/ros2/common_interfaces/blob/master/geometry_msgs/msg/Twist.msg) messages.

> - [AckermannDrive](https://index.ros.org/p/ackermann_msgs/#rolling)

Reviewer 3: Add the Skid Steering to documentation here (and other places where it applies)

  - example call: `ros2 service call /spawn_entity gazebo_msgs/srv/SpawnEntity '{name: 'robot', initial_pose: {position:{ x: 4, y: 4, z: 0.2}, orientation: {x: 0.0, y: 0.0, z: 0.0, w: 1.0}}}'`
- Spawning in defined spawn point: spawnable name should be passed in request.name and the name of the spawn point in request.xml
  - example call: `ros2 service call /spawn_entity gazebo_msgs/srv/SpawnEntity '{name: 'robot', xml: 'spawn_spot'}'`
- Available spawnable names access: names of available spawnables are sent in response.model_names
  - example call: `ros2 service call /get_available_spawnable_names gazebo_msgs/srv/GetWorldProperties`
- Defined spawn points' names access: names of defined points are sent in response.model_names
  - example call: `ros2 service call /get_spawn_points_names gazebo_msgs/srv/GetWorldProperties`
- Detailed spawn point info access: spawn point name should be passed in request.model_name. Defined pose is sent in response.pose.
  - example call: `ros2 service call /get_spawn_point_info gazebo_msgs/srv/GetModelState '{model_name: 'spawn_spot'}'`

## Handling custom ROS 2 dependencies

The ROS 2 Gem will respect your choice of [__

> sourced__](https://docs.ros.org/en/galactic/Tutorials/Workspace/Creating-A-Workspace.html#source-the-overlay) ROS 2

Reviewer 3: update link to rolling or humble instead of galactic

additional packages in your project. To do so, use the `target_depends_on_ros2` function:

```
target_depends_on_ros2_packages(<your_target> <ros_package1> <ros_package2>)
```

in your project's `Gem/CMakeLists.txt`.

#### Example

It could be the case that you need to create new type of sensor publishing a custom message.

Lets assume your project is called `MyProject`, the custom message package is called `my_sensor_msgs` and ROS 2
workspace
`my_ros2_ws`. Take following steps:

1. Build your ROS 2 message package in a workspace as you normally would (e.g. `~/projects/my_ros2_ws`)
2. Source the overlay: `source ~/projects/my_ros2_ws/install/setup.bash`.
3. Put `target_depends_on_ros2_packages(MyProject my_sensor_msgs)` in your `Gem/CMakeLists.txt` file.
4. You can now build `MyProject` and use the new messages.

Remember to __always have your ROS 2 overlay sourced__ when building and running the project as sourcing provides
visibility of ROS 2 package paths.

# Diagram of classes

Some classes with relationships and functions are presented on this diagram. Specific sensor classes (e.g. Lidar) are
not included. Some classes are presented in sub-diagrams:

> ![classes diagram](/images/user-guide/gems/ros2/diagram_ros2_gem.svg)

Reviewer 3: also needs to be updated

Author: Reflect on recent changes, Adam?

---
linkTitle: Guide
title: O3DE ROS 2 Gem Details
description: User guide to develop ROS 2 enabled simulation
toc: true
---

The O3DE ROS 2 Gem and its build instructions can be found in [this repository](https://github.com/o3de/o3de-extras/tree/development/Gems/ROS2).

> TheROS 2 Gem helps to build robotic simulations with [ROS 2 / Robot Operating System](https://www.ros.org/).

Reviewer 2: nit: TheROS 2 -> The ROS 2

environment variable (`echo $ROS_DISTRO`).

## ROS 2 Concepts

Please refer to [ROS 2 Concepts documentation](https://docs.ros.org/en/humble/Concepts.html).

## Structure and Communication

The Gem creates a [ROS 2 node](https://docs.ros.org/en/humble/Tutorials/Understanding-ROS2-Nodes.html) which is
directly a part of the ROS 2 ecosystem. 
As such, your simulation will not use any bridges to communicate and is subject to configuration through settings such as Environment Variables. 
It is truly a part of the ecosystem.

Note that the simulation node is handled through `ROS2SystemComponent` - a singleton. 
However, you are free to create and use your own nodes if you need more than one.

Typically, you will be creating publishers and subscriptions. This is done
through [rclcpp API](https://docs.ros2.org/humble/api/rclcpp/classrclcpp_1_1Node.html). Example:

```
auto ros2Node = ROS2Interface::Get()->GetNode();
AZStd::string fullTopic = ROS2Names::GetNamespacedName(GetNamespace(), m_MyTopic);
m_myPublisher = ros2Node->create_publisher<sensor_msgs::msg::PointCloud2>(fullTopic.data(), QoS());
```

> Note that QoS class is a simple wrapper to [rclcpp::QoS](https://docs.ros2.org/humble/api/rclcpp/classrclcpp_1_1QoS.html).

Author: Also adjusted link

### Frames

> `ROS2FrameComponent` is a representation of an interesting physical part of the robot. It handles spatio-temporal

Reviewer 2: (repeated in a few spots - e.g. line 105-106)

> `ROS2FrameComponent` is a representation of an interesting physical part of the robot. It handles spatio-temporal

Author: Removed those random breaks.

or `SkidSteeringControlComponent` ,
depending on steering type. You can also implement your own control component or use LUA scripting to handle these
commands.

Unless scripting is used, control components should translate ROS 2 commands to events on `VehicleInputControlBus`.
These events will be handled by a [`VehicleModelComponent`](#vehicle-model) if it is present.

You can use tools such as [rqt_robot_steering](https://index.ros.org/p/rqt_robot_steering/) to move your robot with
Twist messages.
`RobotControl` is suitable to use with [ROS 2 navigation stack](https://navigation.ros.org/).

It is possible to implement your own control mechanisms with this Component.

### Vehicle Model

`VehicleModelComponent` serves the purpose of converting inputs such as target velocity, steering or acceleration to
physical forces on parts of a vehicle (robot).
`VehicleModel` has a `VehicleConfiguration` which is used to define axles, parametrize and assign wheels.

The model requires a `WheelControllerComponent` present in each wheel entity. It also uses an implementation
of `DriveModel`, which converts vehicle inputs to forces acting on steering elements and wheels.

#### Wheel Controller

> A wheel controller is a controller that should be attached to the vehicle's wheel.

Author: Done x2

  | `DriveModel / Steering PID / IMin`             | Minimum integration impact of PID.                                       |
  | `DriveModel / Steering PID / IMax`             | Maximum integration impact of PID.                                       |
  | `DriveModel / Steering PID / AntiWindUp`       | Prevents integral wind-up in PID.                                        |
  | `DriveModel / Steering PID / OutputLimit`      | Clamps output to maximum value.                                          |
  | `DriveModel / Vehicles Limits / Speed limit `  | Maximum achievable linear speed in meters per second.                    |
  | `DriveModel / Vehicles Limits / Steering limit`| Maximum achievable steering angle.                                       |
#### Skid Steering Drive Model
The model computes velocities in the joints of the vehicle and applies it accordinlgy to commanded velocity and configuration.

![SkidSteeringModel](/images/user-guide/gems/ros2/skidSteeringModel.png)  
Parameters of the model are exposed to the user via `AckermannVehicleModelComponent`:

>   |------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|

Reviewer 3: Whoa, nice catch, thank you!
